# TLPI 9. Process Credentials

ID types are:

-  real user ID and group ID;
-  effective user ID and group ID;
-  saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID;
-  file-system user ID and group ID (Linux-specific); and
-  supplementary group IDs.

Chaptor target:

1. purpose of these process identifiers
2. System calls/library functions to retrieve and change process identifiers.
3. Privileged and unprivileged processes
4. Set-user-ID & set-group-ID mechanisms.

### 9.1 Real User ID and Real Group ID

The user and group to which the process belongs to.

### 9.2 Effective User ID and Effective Group ID

- Determine the permissions a process has.

- 0: root, superuser privilege (**Privileged Process**)

- Effective = Real, until:
  1. System calls to change them
  2. via *set-user-id* or *set-group-id* programs

### 9.3 Set-User-ID and Set-Group-ID Programs

- Abbreviation: set-UID & set-GID program.
- Allow any user who run this program has the given privilege.
- set-UID-root vs set-UID
  set-GID-root vs set-GID





### 9.7 Retrieving and Modifying Process Credentials

- CAP_SETUID: change process's uid
- CAP_SETGID: change process's gid

#### 9.7.1 Retrieving and Modifying Real, Effective, and Saved Set IDs

- Retrieving real and effective IDs

```c
#include <unistd.h> 

/* Returns real user ID of calling process */
uid_t getuid(void); 

/* Returns effective user ID of calling process */
uid_t geteuid(void); 

/* Returns real group ID of calling process */
gid_t getgid(void); 

/* Returns effective group ID of calling process */
gid_t getegid(void);
```

- Modifying effective IDs **and** perhaps, the real IDs.

```c
#include <unistd.h>

/* Both return 0 on success, or –1 on error */

int setuid(uid_t uid);

int setgid(gid_t gid);
```

​	⚠️ After `setuid` and `setgid` call, **privileged** process permanently becomes **unprivilegd**

- Modifying effective IDs

```c
#include <unistd.h>

/* Both return 0 on success, or –1 on error */

int seteuid(uid_t euid); 

int setegid(gid_t egid);
```

​	⚠️ After `seteuid` and `setegid` call, **privileged** process becomes **unprivilegd**, but can regain privilege by calling again.

- Modifying real and effective IDs

```c
#include <unistd.h>

/* Both return 0 on success, or –1 on error */

int setreuid(uid_t ruid, uid_t euid); 

int setregid(gid_t rgid, gid_t egid);
```

